
Anatole France

' (; born ', ; 16 April 1844 – 12 October 1924) was a French poet, journalist, and novelist. He was born in Paris, and died in . He was a successful novelist, with several best-sellers. Ironic and skeptical, he was considered in his day the ideal French man of letters. He was a member of the "", and won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Literature "in recognition of his brilliant literary achievements, characterized as they are by a nobility of style, a profound human sympathy, grace, and a true Gallic temperament". Anatole France was also documented to have a brain volume just two-thirds the normal size.

France is also widely believed to be the model for narrator Marcel's literary idol in 's "In Search of Lost Time".

The son of a bookseller, France spent most of his life around books. France was a bibliophile. His father's bookstore, called the ', specialized in books and papers on the French Revolution and was frequented by many notable writers and scholars of the day. Anatole France studied at the ', a private Catholic school, and after graduation he helped his father by working in his bookstore. After several years he secured the position of cataloguer at and at . In 1876 he was appointed librarian for the French Senate.

Anatole France began his literary career as a poet and a journalist. In 1869, ' published one of his poems, '. In 1875, he sat on the committee which was in charge of the third ' compilation. As a journalist, from 1867, he wrote many articles and notices. He became famous with the novel ' (1881). Its protagonist, skeptical old scholar Sylvester Bonnard, embodied France's own personality. The novel was praised for its elegant prose and won him a prize from the . 
In ' (1893) Anatole France ridiculed belief in the occult; and in ' (1893), France captured the atmosphere of the '. France was elected to the ' in 1896.

France took an important part in the Dreyfus affair. He signed 's manifesto supporting Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish army officer who had been falsely convicted of espionage. France wrote about the affair in his 1901 novel ".

France's later works include ' (1908) which satirizes human nature by depicting the transformation of penguins into humans – after the animals have been baptized by mistake by the nearsighted Abbot . It is a satirical history of France, starting in Medieval times, going on to the writer's own time with special attention to the Dreyfus Affair and concluding with a dystopian future. ' (1912) is a novel, set in Paris during the French Revolution, about a true-believing follower of and his contribution to the bloody events of the Reign of Terror of 1793–94. It is a wake-up call against political and ideological fanaticism and explores various other philosophical approaches to the events of the time. " (1914) is often considered France's most profound novel. Loosley based on the Christian myth of the War in Heaven, it tells the story of Arcade, the guardian angel of . Arcade falls in love, joins the revolutionary movement of angels, and towards the end realizes that the overthrow of God is meaningless unless "in ourselves and in ourselves alone we attack and destroy Ialdabaoth."

He was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1921. He died in 1924 and is buried in the community cemetery near Paris.

On 31 May 1922, France's entire works were put on the "" (Prohibited Books Index) of the Roman Catholic Church. He regarded this as a "distinction". This Index was abolished in 1966.

In 1877, Anatole France married , a granddaughter of a miniaturist who painted Louis XVI, with whom he had a daughter, Suzanne, in 1881 (dec. 1918). France's relations with women were always turbulent, and in 1888 he began a relationship with , who conducted a celebrated literary salon of the Third Republic; the affair lasted until shortly before her death in 1910. After his divorce in 1893, he had many liaisons, notably with , who committed suicide in 1911. France married again in 1920, .

Politically, Anatole France was a socialist and an outspoken supporter of the 1917 Russian Revolution. In 1920, France gave his support to the newly founded French Communist Party.

He was an atheist.

After his death in 1924 France was the object of written attacks, including a particularly venomous one from the Nazi collaborator, , and detractors decided he was a vulgar and derivative writer. An admirer, the English writer George Orwell, defended him however and declared that he remained very readable, and that "it is unquestionable that he was attacked partly from political motive."










