
Anbar (town)

Anbar () was a town in Iraq, at lat. 33 deg. 22' N., long. 43 deg. 49' E, on the east bank of the Euphrates, just south of the Nahr 'Isa, or Sakhlawieh canal, the northernmost of the canals connecting that river with the Tigris.

Anbar was originally called Pērōz-Šāpūr or Pērōz-Šābuhr (from , meaning "Victorious Shapur"; in "prgwzšhypwhr"; in ), and became known as Perisapora or Pirisabora to the Greeks and Romans. The city was founded ca. 350 by the Sassanid Persian king Shapur II, and located in the Sassanid province of Asōristān. Perisapora was sacked and burned by Emperor Julian in April 363, during his invasion of the Sassanid Empire. The town became a refuge for the Arab, Christian and Jewish colonies of that region. According to medieval Arabic sources, most of the inhabitants of the town migrated north to find the city of Hdatta south of Mosul.

Anbar was adjacent or identical to the Babylonian Jewish center of Nehardea (), and lies a short distance from the present-day town of Fallujah, formerly the Babylonian Jewish center of Pumbeditha ().

The name of the town was then changed to "Anbar" (Middle Persian word for "granaries"). Abu al-Abbas as-Saffah, the founder of the Abbasid caliphate, made it his capital, and such it remained until the founding of Baghdad in 762. 
It continued to be a place of much importance throughout the Abbasid period.

Anbar used to host an Assyrian community from the fifth century: the town was the seat of a bishopric of the Church of the East. The names of fourteen of its bishops of the period 486–1074 are known, three of whom became Chaldean Patriarch of Babylon.
No longer a residential bishopric, having faded.

Anbar is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see of the Chaldean Catholic Church, established as titular bishopric in 1980.
It has had the following incumbents, generally of the lowest (episcopal) rank, "with a single archiepiscopal (intermediate) exception, the first :

It is now entirely deserted, occupied only by mounds of ruins, whose great number indicate the city's former importance.





